## Chapter1 0:00 - 10:00

- Q: Christof Koch, is that Francis Crick behind you there?

- A: Yes, it's a painting he gave me. It's a photograph of him in a wicker chair. He gave that to me half a year before he passed away, and it says for Christof Francis keeping an eye on you.

- Q: So you have it there in your office watching over you at all times. 

- A: Okay looking over my shoulders at all times, yes. 

- Q: I am speaking to you at the Allen Brain Institute in Seattle Washington where you were wooed away from Caltech amazingly enough. 

- A: That's right.
- Q: So before we dive into your book just again to introduce everybody, just remind you why you're here, your new book. 
- A: Oh! You have it! I haven’t seen it!
- Q: You haven’t seen your book?
- A: No!
- Q: Yeah The feeling of life itself Why Consciousness is widespread but can’t be computed. Okay well yeah some people are gonna dispute that but that’s it. Before we get into that, just kind of catch us up you know, you're famous for having worked with Francis Crick when you were at Caltech and you had kind of the traditional academic career just grinding along, doing your thing and then, all of a sudden you're now in Seattle running the Allen Brain Institute. What is it you're doing there and why did you do that transition.
- A: So we have thirty scientists focus on a few very large projects in the brain sciences. So for instance we have a big nature paper coming out next week where we look at human brain material either from dead brain or from neurosurgical excised brain tissue, and 20 minutes later after the neurosurgeon takes it out of the brain of a patient it sits in our in our lab and then we can do what's called single-cell transcriptomics so we can read out all the genes that are expressed in the different neurons to get a view of how many types of different brain cells there are in a human compared to the different types of brain cells in a mouse. 
- Q: How many are there in humans versus a mouse's?
- A: Well, in any one cortical area turns out it's roughly the same roughly 100 and that's the same number in human and mouse, and it's sort of similar the number of genes, when people first in the late 80s’ identified 20,000 genes in the mouse genome they said ‘Wow humans are clearly vastly more complex, so they're going to have hundred thousand or two hundred thousand’. No, they have roughly the same number of genes, we have roughly the same number of types of different neurons, probably across entire brain on the order of a thousand two thousand five thousand. Although, there are many many differences and those difference matter. So particularly if you, here for example, if you are into making drugs to help people with schizophrenia or autism and for example you're after serotonin receptors and you make a drug based on some animal, particularly mouse experiment. Well the same serotonin receptor may be distributed, looks like it's on different types of cells so therefore what you've find in the mouse doesn't really generalize to what you find in human. So while the principles are similar the details really differ greatly, which explains why so much drug research there was, you know, started in the mouse, you can cure mice but you can’t cure human with that. 
- Q: And is that because just the combinatorial complexity of, you know, when you just start grinding along on the numbers of combinations and they just don't extrapolate from one species to the other.
- A: Yeah you gotta remember if you trace us back down the evolutionary tree, the last common ancestor lived at the time of the dinosaurs, 65 million years ago and since then we've diverged. Your brains are built along similar principle but all the details have changed over the last 65 million years. So you really gotta work with human brain tissue which of course it's much more challenging.
- Q: What year did Francis died? 
- A: In 2004.
- Q: 2004, so it's 15 years. What have we discovered since then that he would be surprised about or pleased to see solved or still mystified.
- A: Well so first of all I was recently rereading there's a very one of his better known articles, which was written in 1979, in 1979! So that's basically you know, that's 40 years ago when he just made the transition from molecular biology to neurobiology, and when he also made the transition from Cambridge England to La Jolla here in California, and he wrote a very forward-looking article about brain sciences and some of the things that should be invented. He predicted, wouldn't it be great if we have tools that light up neurons with, you know, with flashes of light when they discharge electrical activity, wouldn't be cool if we can turn neurons selectively on and off. These are all tools that people developed over the last decade. So those things he would have been comfortable with. What he probably would continue to be surprised at, it's the vast complexity of the brain, you know, when he and I worked together 15 or 20 years ago we thought there were going to be simpler molecular codes that express which cells living in which bits, which specific part of the brain, and all of that turned out to be much much more complicated than we had imagined. And some of the possibility to manipulate the human brain again he might have been surprised. On the other hand he was very fast-thinking so I'm not sure whether he really would have been surprised by many of the current developments.
- Q: I was trying to find that famous quote for his book the astonishing hypothesis. Your joys and your sorrows your memories and your ambitions your sense of personal identity and free will and let me see what's the rest of that quote, I mean it's still kind of true, are in fact no more than the behavior of a vast assembly of nerve cells and their associated molecules. Of course that's so broad, it's kind of true by definition, but why was that astonishing at the time.
- A: It wasn't, I mean it was a book titled that he later regretted. It was suggested to him by his publisher, that would be catchy. No this is what most brain scientists believed at the time and believed to do. Truly that ultimately who you are is a part of your neurons, also and this is important it's not the same as your neurons, so my experience my love that I have for my wife or for my children it's not the same as the neurons that are involved in that action. Those are really two different things, one is necessary for the other, right?  It's sort of the physical substrate of the other, it's not my heart as ancient believe it's not my liver that give rise to my feelings, it is the brain. But the brain is different from the feelings that that the brain gives rise to.
